Stimuli

Auditory binary sequences used in all five experiments were composed of an alternation of low pitch and high pitch tones. Each stimulus was a complex tone synthesized with the superimposition of four sine waves. Sound frequencies were chosen to correspond to musical notes: 494, 740, 988 and 1480Hz (i.e. B, F#, B, F#) for the low pitch tone, and 622, 932, 1245 and 1865Hz (i.e. D#, Bb, D#, Bb) for the high pitch tone. The two complex tones were randomly assigned to items A and B for each experimental session. Thus, stimulus attribution changed from one sequence to the next and from one participant to the next but was kept constant for a given sequence in a given participant. In addition, one lower pitch tone (415, 622, 831 and 1245Hz) and one higher pitch tone (740, 1109, 1480 and 2217Hz) were synthesized, to be used as easy-to-detect super-deviant (or C) stimuli in experiments 1 and 2. All tones were 50 ms long, with 5 ms initial and final ramp. Inter-stimulus interval (ISI) was 200 ms.  Ten 16-items long sequential patterns were chosen for experiment 1 (see Fig 2), which were all composed of the same number of items (8 As, 8 Bs), giving a total sequence duration of 3800 ms. The first four sequential patterns, of lowest complexity, followed the simple algebraic pattern (AnBn)x: (AB)8, (A2B2)4, (A4B4)2 and A8B8. The period of these sequences differed (2, 4, 8 and 16 tones).

Procedure

In the first part of experiment 1, participants performed the complexity rating task. They were asked to judge each sequence on a scale going from “1: very simple” to “9: very complex”, by pressing the corresponding key on the keyboard following sequence presentation. They were informed that “each sequence contains two different beeps, presented according to a more or less complex order” and listened two examples, presented as a “rather simple” (AAB- BAABBAABBAABB), and as “rather complex” (ABAAABABAABBBABB). A response was requested at each trial. Each of the ten sequences was presented three times, in a pseudo-ran- dom order (30 trials). The low-pitch and high-pitch tone were randomly assigned to either A and B or to B and A at each presentation.

In the second part of experiment 1, the violation detection task, each of the ten sequences was tested in a different short session of approximately 4 min (Fig 1B). Order of sessions was randomized for each participant. Each session comprised three blocks separated by pauses and in which the sequence (3800 ms long) was repeatedly presented with a 600 ms inter-trial dura- tion. In the first block, the habituation block, the unaltered sequence was presented eight times. Participants were asked to listen to the stimuli and try to remember the sequence. In the two following blocks, the testing blocks, participants were asked to respond whenever they detected that the sequence had been altered (by a deviant tone), by pressing the space key of the keyboard as quickly as possible (without waiting until the end of sequence presentation).  Each of the two test blocks comprised 18 sequences, 9 of which contained one deviant tone (among the sixteen tones composing the sequence). Two-thirds of the deviant sequences were produced by replacing a tone A by a tone B, or conversely (“sequence deviant” tones, 12 trials per session). The remaining third were obtained by replacing one tone by a low or high-pitch C sound (“super-deviant” tone, 6 trials per session). Deviant tones could occur at only four, equally probable, positions within the second half of the sequence (positions 9, 11, 13 or 15).
